摘要:图像超分辨率是一项基本的图像处理任务，旨在从低分辨率图像重建出对应的高分辨率图像。这个任务因其需要从有限的像素信息中恢复出丰富的细节而极具挑战性，特别是在原始图像存在噪声或质量不佳的情况下更加复杂。早期的单图像超分辨率网络大多是基于卷积网络实现的。然而卷积层因为在长距离像素的建模上仍有一定的限制，这一问题造成了卷积网络在超分辨率的应用上存在一定的限制。最近，基于视觉Transformer的模型因其自注意力机制在长距离建模方面的优势而在超分辨率领域获得了广泛关注，显示出巨大的潜力。
现存的基于Transformer网络存在感受野有限和激活像素的问题。为了进一步提升图像超分辨率性能，本文提出了一种基于轴向自注意力的单图像超分辨率网络。该网络使用轴向自注意力来扩大感受野，并且在有限的计算量和参数量下充分发挥网络的性能。此外为了解决传统Transformer网络中激活像素不足的问题，本文通过改进Transformer块中多层感知机(Multilayer Perceptron, MLP)的结构来激活更多的像素进而提升网络的性能。
本文还提出一种结合卷积和Transformer的双路超分辨率网络架构。通过引入轴向自注意力优化Transformer部分，并设计为双路架构，其中一个分支负责提取局部特征，另一个分支负责提取粗粒度全局特征，实现两种特征的互补融合。这种设计有效地克服了Transformer缺乏全局信息的问题。为了能有效融合两路分支的特征，本文设计了一种双路特征融合模块，该模块采用卷积网络架构，通过设计多路的特征并且在不同支路上应用渐进融合策略，来有效提升两路分支融合的性能。本文还设计了一种特征后处理块，在特征后处理块中，将特征分成不同的支路，最后使用通道注意力和增强空间注意力机制来进行最后的信息融合，从而解决深度模型中信息丢失的问题。 
实验结果表明，无论是客观指标还是主观视觉效果，本文方法与其他同类方法相比，在参数量和模型性能之间取得更好的平衡，并且具有更好的客观指标和主观视觉效果。


Abstract: Image super-resolution is a fundamental image processing task aimed at reconstructing high-resolution images from low-resolution ones. This task is particularly challenging as it requires the restoration of rich details from limited pixel information, and becomes even more complex when the original images are noisy or of poor quality. Early single-image super-resolution networks were mostly based on convolutional networks. However, convolutional layers have certain limitations in modeling long-distance pixel relationships, which have restricted their application in super-resolution. Recently, models based on visual Transformers have gained widespread attention in the super-resolution field due to their self-attention mechanisms, which provide advantages in modeling long-distance relationships, demonstrating great potential.
To further enhance image super-resolution performance, this paper proposes a single image super-resolution network based on axial self-attention. This network uses axial self-attention to expand the receptive field and fully exploit the network's performance with limited computational and parameter resources. Additionally, this method improves the issue of insufficient activation of pixels in traditional Transformer networks by enhancing the structure of the multi-layer perceptron in Transformer blocks to activate more pixels and thus improve network performance.
This article also introduces a dual-path super-resolution network architecture that combines convolution and Transformer. By incorporating axial self-attention to optimize the Transformer part and designing a dual-path architecture, where one path  is responsible for extracting local features and the other for coarse-grained global features, it achieves a complementary fusion of the two types of features. This design effectively overcomes the problem of Transformers lacking global information. To effectively merge features from both paths, a dual-path feature fusion module is designed using a convolutional network architecture. It employs multiple feature paths and applies a progressive fusion strategy on different branches to enhance the performance of the fusion of the two branches. Additionally, a feature post-processing block is designed. In this block, features are divided into different branches, and finally, a channel attention mechanism is used for the final information fusion, thereby addressing the issue of information loss in deep models.
Experimental results show that, in terms of both objective metrics and subjective visual effects, our method achieves a better balance between parameter quantity and model performance compared to other similar methods, and it exhibits better objective metrics and subjective visual effects.

